Once around supernova 1987a.
So SN987A
was the explosion of a giant star in a
small dwarf galaxy 160,000 lighty years
from the sun. It was seen on the 23rd of
February for the first time as the star
detonated. The core collapsed inwards
and the outer layers were blasted away
in a huge explosion. And you can see the
explosion in the two images on the right
there. A wide field image and a much
more zoomed in if showing the shock
waves emanating out from the center. It
was located in the constellation of
Dorado in the southern hemisphere inside
the large melanic cloud near a feature
called the tarantula nebula. Now on the
map there, the large melanic cloud is
the green ring where it says 2070.
That is the center of the tarantula
nebula.
It was detected twice independently by
Shelton and Duhal at the La Campanis
Observatory in Chile and also by amateur
astronomer Albert Jones in New Zealand.
It's shown in the image on the right
here as the very bright thing just to
the right of the center. Up to the left
there is the Tarantula Nebula and it was
peaking at a magnitude of three which
actually made it brighter than any of
the stars in the constellation of
Dorado.
Having been discovered,
investigations proceeded looking back
through previous photographs of the
area, trying to determine what it was
that had exploded, and pre-covery images
were made
to show that the star was rapidly
brightening during that month. Now, the
large melanic cloud, 160,000 lighty
years or so away from us, that's a small
dwarf galaxy that's captured into orbit
around the Milky Way. You can see this
rather nice image of it in the sky, and
I've seen it in the sky overhead in New
Zealand when I had the pleasure to visit
about 20 years ago. And then up to the
upper left hand side of the galaxy,
there is the bright area. That's the
Tarantula Nebula. If we zoom right in on
that, we get this fantastic image here
showing a huge amount of gas and dust
out of which many new stars have been
formed and are still forming. And right
in the center there, that hot young
cluster, the the designation of which is
NGC 2070, the 2070 on the star map that
I showed you. So this contains many many
hot young stars, many of which are giant
and destined to live short violent lives
and explode as supernovi. And uh the one
that gave rise to supernova 1987a
of course did so.
It's actually the best observed and
closest supernova to us since604.
or Kepler's supernova of that year was
much closer. That was inside our Milky
Way, but of course it predated the
invention of the telescope. So nobody
was able to uh investigate that in
detail.
So 1987A
is the first to have been studied with
all our modern instruments, and we're
still waiting for a new supernova inside
the Milky Way to explode at some point.
uh so it would be vastly closer to us
and we'd get a much better view.
When we look at supernovi we often
follow the light curve. You observe how
bright the object appears to be from an
initial peak and then gradually decaying
away in a classic curve as per the curve
here from 1987a.
And this is driven by the initial flash
and then the radioactive decay of the
isotopes that are created in the
explosion.
The radioactivity of those emits gamma
rays and the gamma rays are then picked
up by the gas and dust trapping the
energy heating the material causing uh
further expansion of course and causing
it to glow very brightly indeed.
But inevitably the radioactive isotopes
decay away and the brightness drops and
does so in this characteristic curve
with an initial sharp peak. Um then a
small shoulder where it says radioactive
tail 56 cobalt at the top there uh
caused by that isotope and then you get
uh further processes dust formation and
then a radioactive tail caused by longer
lived isotopes.
So the prime reactions are 56 nickel
decaying to 56 cobalt giving out a gamma
ray and an anti-elect electron a
posetron. Um the anti-electron soon
meets an ordinary electron and gives
more gamma rays of course as it
annihilates. And on average it seems to
be around the 9 days of duration for
that initial very rapid peak as that
first reaction occurs.
Then cobalt decays to iron much more
slowly releasing energy again in
particular gamma rays and again
anti-electrons
carrying away the positive charge. um
that's much slower and gives you a
prolongation of the light curve. And as
it goes down, those isotopes decay and
it's left to longer lived ones. In
particular, the decay of things like
isotope 44 of the element titanium,
44Ti,
and that has a halflife of about 60
years. So now all the cobalt has decayed
pretty much. And there is still most of
the remaining power at a lower level is
being emitted by the decay of isotopes
like uh 44 titanium. We've detected that
in the X-ray spectrum with the integral
spacecraft and gamma rays have also been
detected with gammaray telescopes and
the gammaray spectrum is shown at the
top there with a peak that is uh put
down to 44 TI decay.
So what happened? What came before the
supernova? Where was the progenitor
star? Well, that is it shining with the
six defraction points around it just to
the left of the center of the tarantula
nebula and it was located just 4 days
after the event. We went back and found
images and worked out which star it must
have been that had been responsible for
the explosion. And it's called Sandulik
and was a blue super giant star
observed by Nicholas Sandulik in 1970
and documented. It was magnitude 12. So
the great distance resulting in it being
fairly faint but nevertheless a real
powerhouse given how far away it was. a
blue super giant around about 20 times
the mass of our sun classed as a B3. So
a fairly hot B-class star. Not the
hottest and most massive. The Oclass or
even the Wolf Ray stars, those are even
hotter and more powerful and more
massive, but nevertheless quite a giant
temperature 16,000 Kelvin putting out a
100,000 times the output power of our
sun. So somewhat similar in many ways to
stars like Riel and Denb that we see in
our night skies because they're
dramatically closer to us. Of course,
apparently a normal luminous super giant
in the run-up to the explosion. It may
well have been a luminous blue variable
in recent past in the last few thousands
of years or so. Uh we're not quite sure
about that. But we just don't have very
many observations of it. Wasn't really
noted until before 1970 after all. But
the blue super giants exploding was not
something that anyone expected.
We understood that it was red super
giants, red hyper giants that exploded
as core collapse supernovi.
And to see a blue giant doing so
directly was a surprise. So much so that
people
tried to explain what might have
happened in other ways, suggesting that
there had been a stellar collision or
some very rare event. But
based on the properties of super 19
supernova 1987a and it progenitor as a
blue super giant a wide search was made
for other supernovi and it seems that we
have found several other cases of blue
super giants exploding. So the models of
ste stellar evolution needed a bit of an
update and the image on the right there
that is a computer simulation of a blue
super giant explosion. So we now think
that we understand what's going on
after the explosion. We took lots of
images and there's a time lapse here
taken by the Hubble Space Telescope of
the rings forming around the central
explosion. And as the central explosion
faded, the rings brightened and produced
a very clumpy appearance.
Now, this is not material that was
ejected by the supernova. It's material
ejected in the preceding 10,000 years,
the stellar wind from the hot blue super
giant pouring material out and forming
into a rings and clouds and clumps
around the star.
about 2/3 of a lightyear away from the
center. And this was then illuminated
and energized by the flash of X-rays and
ultraviolet light which took 8 months to
cover that 2/3 of a lightyear to reach
it and cause it to then begin to glow,
ionizing the material. And we've been
able to study the emission lines in the
spectra of the rings there and work out
what they were made of as well,
revealing a lot of dirt and dust. And
that's excellent because supernovi were
thought to be a major source of cosmic
dust, carbon grains, silicate grains, uh
metal dust, that sort of thing. But this
was the real first confirmation that
this was a major source that a lot of
the dust had been ejected by the star in
the first place and then yet more was
poured out in the supernova itself
coming from the very central region. So
sort of two sources of dust and that
accounts for how much dust there is in
between the stars as a result of all
these previous generations exploding.
Now we also saw the light bouncing back
directly from these outer shells of
materials in what's called a light echo.
So we saw the flash and then 8 months
later the light had traveled outwards
and started penetrating the shells of
overlying material lighting them up and
some of the light just bouncing back our
way and having taken a longer path. The
direct line of sight had taken 160,000
years but to go sideways first and then
come towards us took an extra eight
months. And in fact, because we can see
the size of the rings and we know the
speed of light, um, we can work out a
better estimate of the distance by a
spot of triangulation.
And doing that, we came out with an
accurate distance of 168,000 light years
out to uh, supernova 1987a.
definitely inside the large melenic
cloud. But refining our distance
estimates,
the truly fascinating thing about this
was the neutrino burst
at 7:35 universal time. three different
h sorry 3 hours before the visible light
arrived
three different detectors saw a burst of
neutrinos. Now when I say a burst it was
12 neutrinos detected by the cameo
candandy 2 experiment in Japan imaged in
the top right there with all those
myriad detectors.
Eight were detected in the Brook Haven
detector shown at the very bottom right
there with a diver swimming in the the
water inside its pool and five by the
back sand detector shown in the middle
there. So not very many particles but
enough to stand out from the relatively
low background rate just during the 13se
second burst that had arrived.
And of course at that time nobody knew
what it was but three hours later the
visible supernova was detected and uh
the uh two can then be associated. These
detectors are reasonably able to back
calculate the direction of the arrival
of the neutrinos and so the the uh burst
could be tied back to SN1 1987A.
Now those neutrinos are released when
the core of a star collapses to a
neutron star. You get neutrinos at other
times but you get an absolute blizzard
when a supernova of this type collapses.
As it does so, the enormous pressure in
the core crushes the protons and
electrons together to form neutrons and
a burst of neutrinos is released
carrying away the uh leptton number
because the electrons are destroyed.
Electrons are lepttons so are neutrinos
and you have to keep the number of
lepttons the same. So when you destroy
an electron, the leptonness has to go
somewhere and it's the neutrino that
carries it away. But the visible light
from the explosion has to fight its way
out through the core of the remaining
overlying layers of material and break
out to the surface. And it's that
process once the shock wave breaks the
star apart then you get to see the
visible flash. And that takes the 3
hours uh plus that uh results in the
delay of the visible light arriving. Of
course, the light is traveling towards
us at the speed of light as fast as it
can. The neutrinos are nearly going that
fast. So the light gradually overhauls
them and reduces that initial delay by a
small amount uh depending on exactly how
fast the neutrinos are going. But they
are doing something like 99.9% the speed
of light some of these. So they are
terrifically energetic.
Now our calculations suggest that the
total energy output of the supernova was
10 ^ 46 jewels of energy and that 99% of
that was carried away by the neutrinos.
And this fits with our models. 10 ^ 58
neutrinos are created. a truly
staggering number. And of course, they
radiate out in all directions across the
sphere, ever expanding around the
explosion. And from a distance of
160,000 light years, it's no surprise
that we only detected about 20 of them.
Doing this and detecting the burst of
neutrinos has helped us confirm some of
our understanding of them. It's set an
upper limit on the mass of the electron
neutrino at 30,000 times smaller than
that of an electron or less. And it's
confirmed that there must be fewer than
eight different types of neutrino. Now,
that's fair enough. We think there are
three. There might be more. We don't
really know. Um, some theories like
string theory demand that there are
additional types of neutrino, but we've
never seen any. So uh it puts some
constraints on the standard model of
physics confirming what we already
guessed.
But the mystery is that we couldn't find
the neutron star. It looks like a
neutron star had been created. The burst
of neutrinos agrees with that. But
searches including using the Hubble
Space Telescope could not find it. Now
that is a bit of a mystery. And although
as time went on, we got some clues. In
2019, the ALMA uh the Atakama microwave
telescope in the desert there in Chile
with millimeter uh radiation was able to
make detections
that seem to point to the presence of a
neutron star inside a dense clump.
And in 2021, hard X-rays were detected,
highly energetic X-rays that probably
come from the Pulsar Wind Nebula, the
nebula that is illuminated by all of the
high energy magnetic field and jets that
that creates from the rotating pulsar
that's probably in the center. So, not a
direct detection of the neutron star,
the rotating neutron star being a
pulsar, um, but clues.
Enter James Webb, the James Webb Space
Telescope. This, of course, has got
fantastic resolution, but is coming to
the party slightly late. So now this
image that JWST produced shows this
equatorial ring of material that was
ejected tens of thousands of years
before the supernova now glowing in
infrared. Remember James Web is an
infrared telescope. And in this image uh
the blue color is 1.5 micron infrared.
Cyan is slightly uh longer wavelengths
of 1.64 64 to two and the yellow color
is 2 uh sorry 3.2 to four microns and
red is anything over four microns. So
it's a composite multi-wavelength image
and the bright spots again are those
dense clumps of material heated by the
expanding shock wave. But we couldn't
really see into the center. Delving
right down into the middle. Just there's
too much dust. JWST was able to find
ionized argon in there. And that also
agrees with the uh presence of a neutron
star. And you can see the outer rings
just fading away there. Those two
initial shock waves still moving
outwards in the image. So, is the
neutron star hiding behind a huge cloud
of cosmic dust created by the supernova?
Possibly. So,
perhaps a lot of that material though
fell back onto the neutron star,
boosting its mass over the upper limit
of the mass of a neutron star, the
Tolman Oppenheimer Vulov limit of about
2.2 solar masses. And anything more
massive than that is predicted to
collapse all the way down to a black
hole. But there was one odd result and
it goes back to those neutrinos.
Here's the actual data from the three
different detectors. Yellow for the
camei,
the IMB at Brooklyn in red, and the
Baxan in blue. And I've put the large
ovals around them in two groups. There
was an initial burst of neutrinos, nine
from the Cameo Candai and some others
from the other two detectors during that
first few seconds, the first couple of
seconds of the uh explosion. And then
around the 6 to 10 second mark, there is
a second weaker group of neutrinos that
seem to have arrived perhaps with
slightly lower energies.
Maybe that's lower energy. Certainly the
red ones seem lower. The yellow ones you
could argue that on average they're
lower and the blue ones may be about the
same. But nevertheless, this is pointing
to a two-phase collapse. As if it
collapsed,
produced a burst of neutrinos, quite an
intense one, and then after a few
seconds there was a second phase of
collapse creating more neutrinos.
And the possibility that remains has
been discussed in a number of papers.
There's one here by these Chinese
authors from the university in Hong Kong
there. Um, and there are several others
discussing the idea that 1987a
might have been a quark star in
formation, the generation of a star made
of strange matter, an intermediate
between full collapse from a neutron
star to a black hole. Maybe these quark
stars can exist in the 2.2 to about four
solar mass range as even more extreme
objects. And I discussed that in one of
my very earlier videos called Quark
Stars and Strange Matter, which was
actually perhaps my most popular um
video that I produced during the uh
lockdown period when I started making
videos in order to keep the Cambridge
Astronomical Association alive. Anyway,
I hope you can enjoyed this one and I
hope you can go and enjoy Quark Stars
and Strange Matter as well. A lot of
people have. Thanks very much for
listening. I'll see you on the next one.